Data Interview Post (#49)
agude/agude.github.io: _drafts/2020-12-14-data_science_interview_prep_data_manipulation.md

---
layout: post
title: "Data Science Interview Practice: Data Manipulation"
description: >
image: /files/switrs-dataset/tram_auto_crash_in_1957_frederiksplein_amsterdam.jpg

> show_lead_image: True

Reviewer: X

image_alt: >
categories:
  - career-advice
  - interview-prep
---

<!-- Simple script to call from the "Show/Hide" buttons-->
<script type="text/javascript">
function showhide(d) {

>   d.style.display = (d.style.display !== "none") ? "none" : "block";

Reviewer: Prefer `elt` to `d`. Ternary operator unnecessarily trades legibility for brevity.

}
</script>

> {% assign twitter-name = site.author.twitter %}

Reviewer: This seems like it should be in the header or template or something. Do you have to spell it out in every post?

Author: Actually I should just use site.author.twitter... No reason to alias it.

{% capture file_dir %}/files/interview-prep{% endcapture %}

I often get asked by newly-minted PhDs trying to get their first data job:

> How can I prepare for dataset-based interviews? Do you have any examples of
> datasets to practice with?

I never had a good answer. I would tell them about how the interviews worked,

> but I wished I had something to share that they could work with and practice

Reviewer: "work with and practice on" -> "get their hands on"?

  stacks of papers, and card catalogs.
categories:
  - career-advice
  - interview-prep
---

<!-- Simple script to call from the "Show/Hide" buttons-->
<script type="text/javascript">
function showhide(element) {
  if (element.style.display !== "none") {
    element.style.display = "none";
  } else {
    element.style.display = "block";
  }
}
</script>

{% capture file_dir %}/files/interview-prep{% endcapture %}

I often get asked by newly-minted PhDs trying to get their first data job:

> How can I prepare for dataset-based interviews? Do you have any examples of
> datasets to practice with?

I never had a good answer. I would tell them about how the interviews worked,
but I wished I had something to share that they could get their hands on.

As of today, that's changing. In this post I put together a series of practice
questions like the kind you might see (or be expected to come up with) in a
hands-on data interview using the [curated and hosted dataset of California
Traffic accidents][switrs_dataset]. The dataset is available for download from
both [Kaggle][kaggle] and [Zenodo][zenodo], and I even have an [example

> notebook][example_notebook] for how to work with the data entirely online

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notebook][example_notebook] demonstrating how to work with the data entirely online
```

within Kaggle.

[switrs_dataset]: {% post_url 2020-11-24-switrs_sqlite_hosted_dataset %}
[kaggle]: https://www.kaggle.com/alexgude/california-traffic-collision-data-from-switrs
[zenodo]: https://zenodo.org/record/4284843
[example_notebook]: https://www.kaggle.com/alexgude/starter-california-traffic-collisions-from-switrs

## Interview Format

> As I mentioned in [my post about my last interview experience][last_post],

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As I mentioned in [my post about my most recent interview experience][last_post],
```

> data science and machine learning interviews have gotten more practical,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data science and machine learning interviews have become more practical,
```

[pandas]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pandas_(software)

To help people prepare, I have created a set of questions similar to what you
would get in a real interview. For the exercise you will be using the SWITRS
dataset. I have included a notebook to get you started in Pandas or SQL. The
solution notebooks can be found at the very end.

Good luck, and if you have any questions or suggestions please reach out to me
on Twitter: [@{{ site.author.twitter }}][twitter]

[twitter]: https://twitter.com/{{ site.author.twitter }}

## Questions

### How many collisions are there in the dataset?

A good first thing to check is "How much data am I dealing with?"

<button id="button" onclick="showhide(hidden1)">Show solution</button>
<div class="hidden" id="hidden1" markdown="1" style="display: none;">

Each row in the collisions database represents one collision, so the solution
is nice and short:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(1) AS collision_count
FROM collisions
```

Which returns:

<div class="low-width-table" markdown="1" style="max-width: 20%">

|   collision_count |
|------------------:|
|         9,172,565 |

</div>

</div>

### What percent of collisions involve males aged 16--25?

> Young men are famously unsafe drivers, lets look at how many collisions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Young men are famously unsafe drivers so let's look at how many collisions
```

they're involved in.

<button id="button" onclick="showhide(hidden3)">Show solution</button>
<div class="hidden" id="hidden3" markdown="1" style="display: none;">

The age and gender of the drivers are in the parties table so the query does a

> simple filter on those entries. The tricky part comes from needing the ratio:
> we have to get the total number of collisions. We could hard-code it, but I

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
simple filter on those entries. The tricky part comes from needing to calculate the ratio as this
requires us to get the total number of collisions. We could hard-code the lookup, but I
```

prefer calculating it as part of the query. There isn't a super elegant way to
do it in SQLite, but a sub-query works fine. We also have to cast to a float
to avoid integer division.

```sql
SELECT 
    COUNT(DISTINCT case_id) 
    / (SELECT CAST(COUNT(DISTINCT case_id) AS FLOAT) FROM parties)
    AS percentage
FROM parties
WHERE party_sex = 'male'
AND party_age BETWEEN 16 AND 25
```

The result is:

<div class="low-width-table" markdown="1" style="max-width: 20%">

|   percentage |
|-------------:|
|        0.242 |

</div>

</div>

### How many solo motorcycle crashes are there per year?

A "_solo_" crash is one where the driver runs off the road or hits a

> stationary object. How many solo motorcycle crashes where there each year? Why

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stationary object. How many solo motorcycle crashes were there each year? Why
```

> is 2020 so low?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does 2020 seem to (relatively) have so few?
```

FROM collisions
WHERE motorcycle_collision = True
  AND party_count = 1
GROUP BY collision_year
ORDER BY collision_year
```

This gives us:

<div class="low-width-table" markdown="1" style="max-width: 20%">

|   collision_year |   collision_count |
|-----------------:|------------------:|
|             2001 |              3258 |
|             2002 |              3393 |
|             2003 |              3822 |
|             2004 |              3955 |
|             2005 |              3755 |
|             2006 |              3967 |
|             2007 |              4513 |
|             2008 |              4948 |
|             2009 |              4266 |
|             2010 |              3902 |
|             2011 |              4054 |
|             2012 |              4143 |
|             2013 |              4209 |
|             2014 |              4267 |
|             2015 |              4415 |
|             2016 |              4471 |
|             2017 |              4373 |
|             2018 |              4240 |
|             2019 |              3772 |
|             2020 |              2984 |

</div>

The count is low in 2020 primarily because the data doesn't cover the whole

> year. It is also low due to the COVID pandemic which kept people off the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
year. It is also low due to the COVID pandemic keeping people off the
```

streets, at least initially. To differentiate these two causes we could
compare month by month to last year.

</div>

### What make of vehicle has the largest fraction of accidents on the weekend? During the work week?

Weekdays are generally commute and work-related traffic, while weekends
involves recreational travel. Do we see different vehicles involved in
collisions on these days?

> Only consider vehicle makes with at least 10,000 collisions.

Reviewer 2: Consider expanding this sentence fragment.

<button id="button" onclick="showhide(hidden4)">Show solution</button>
<div class="hidden" id="hidden4" markdown="1" style="display: none;">

This query is tricky. We need to aggregate collisions by vehicle make, which
means we need the parties table. We also care about when the crash happened,

> which means we need the collisions table. So we need to join these tables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which means we need the collisions table. So we need to join these two tables
```

together.

I use a sub-query to do the aggregation. A `WTIH` clause keeps it tidy so we
don't have to copy/paste the sub-query twice. I use `HAVING` to filter out
makes with too few collisions; it has to be `HAVING` and not `WHERE` because
it filters **after** the aggregation.

I then construct two queries that read from the sub-query to select the

> highest row for the weekend and weekdays. I `UNION` to two queries together so

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
highest row for the weekend and weekdays. I `UNION` the two queries together so
```

we end up with a single table containing our results. The double select is to
allow the `ORDER BY` before the `UNION`.

In an interview setting, I would have just written two simpler queries: one
that gets the highest weekend fraction and one that gets the highest weekday
fraction with a lot of copy and pasted code. This would have been a lot faster

> to come up with and write.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to show these two simpler queries? Maybe discuss how one can answer an interview using the two simple queries then discuss how they can be combined into a single query? (are there advantages or drawbacks to that approach?)

Author: Great feedback!

    weekday_count / CAST(total AS FLOAT) AS weekday_fraction
  FROM counter
  ORDER BY weekend_fraction DESC
  LIMIT 1
)

UNION

SELECT * FROM (
  SELECT 
    *,
    weekend_count / CAST(total AS FLOAT) AS weekend_fraction,
    weekday_count / CAST(total AS FLOAT) AS weekday_fraction
  FROM counter
  ORDER BY weekday_fraction DESC
  LIMIT 1
)
```

Which yields:

| make            |   weekend_count |   weekday_count |   total |   weekend_fraction |   weekday_fraction |
|:----------------|----------------:|----------------:|--------:|-------------------:|-------------------:|
| HARLEY-DAVIDSON |          19,125 |          30,477 |  49,602 |             0.385  |             0.614  |
| PETERBILT       |            6477 |          64,102 |  70,579 |             0.092  |             0.908  |

These results makes sense, Peterbilt is a commercial truck manufacturer which
you expect to be driven for work. Harley-Davidson makes iconic motorcycles
that people ride for fun on the weekend with their friends.

</div>

### How many different values represent "Toyota" in the Parties database? How would you go about correcting for this?

> Data is **_never_** as clean as you would hope, even after I [curated it for
> you][switrs_dataset]. How many different ways does "Toyota" show up?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data is **_never_** as clean as you would hope,  and this applies even to the [curated
SWITRS dataset][switrs_dataset]. How many different ways does "Toyota" show up?
```

ORDER BY number_seen DESC
```

Which gives us this table (truncated):

<div class="low-width-table" markdown="1" style="max-width: 20%">

| vehicle_make   |   number_seen |
|:---------------|--------------:|
| TOYOTA         |     2,374,621 |
| TOYO           |       166,209 |
| TOYT           |       146,746 |
| TOYOT          |          2823 |
| TOY            |          2262 |
| TOYTA          |           246 |
| TOYOTA/        |           181 |
| TOYTO          |            84 |
| TOYTOA         |            71 |
| TOYOYA         |            66 |
| TOYT.          |            65 |
| TOYA           |            51 |
| TOYTOTA        |            45 |
| TOYOA          |            43 |
| TOYO /         |            39 |
| TOYT /         |            17 |
| TOYT/          |            14 |
| TYMCO          |            13 |
| TOYOTO         |            10 |
| TOY0           |            10 |
| TOYOYTA        |             7 |
| TOYTT          |             6 |
| TOYOY          |             6 |
| TOYOTS         |             5 |
| TYOTA          |             4 |
| ...            |           ... |

</div>

Most of those look like they mean Toyota, although Tymco is a different

> company the makes street sweepers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
company that makes street sweepers.
```

Here is how I would handle this issue: the top 5 make up the vast majority of entries.
I would fix those by hand and move on. More generally it seems that makes are
represented mostly by their name or a four-letter abbreviation. It wouldn't

> be too hard to fix these for the most common makes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be too hard to detect and fix these for the most common makes.
```
